We are continuing to get headlines out of the White House from President Trump talking about reciprocal tariffs. He has ordered his administration to consider imposing reciprocal tariffs on numerous trading partners to rebalance trade relations. The tariffs would be customized for each country offsetting not just their own levies on US goods, but also non tariff barriers that limit us trade. And he hopes to have a discussion with other nations about existing policies that have created an imbalanced trade environment open also to lowering tariffs of countries, remove trade powers. So again, we'll continue to monitor those headlines.

Yeah, we're getting some other headlines too, even as you speak, Carol, the president saying that the EU doesn't treat the US right when it comes to trade. And just a reminder, he did say this about seven or eight minutes ago that prices may go up in the short term. We'll bring you his comments live when that tape does start to roll a little later in the program.

Yeah. Also says, could start the reciprocal plan by April 2nd. So a little bit of delay. Let's get to it. What does it all mean? Bloomberg News, senior economics writer, Sean Donan is out there in our Washington DC News Bureau and then right here in our New York studio, Bloomberg News, international Economics and policy correspondent Michael McKee. Hey Sean, let's start with you. The president was tweeting or not tweeting, I guess, putting it out on his social media platform early this morning about reciprocal tariffs. We were widely reporting it. We're starting to get some details. What jumps out for you?

Well, look, when he got up this morning, he put out on truth social that this was the big one, and he's kind of delivered in a way, the broadest set of tariffs that he has so far. But the key point here is that we don't yet know. And he said, actually he doesn't know yet what the numbers will be. There's going to be a process to study what these tariffs should be on individual countries. They are going to be targeting the countries with whom the US has the biggest trade deficits. That's going to be the eu that's going to be also countries like Vietnam and South Korea. Japan is going to be in the mix as well. And they're going to go country by country and take a look at essentially the barriers that US goods face when they head into those economies. Now the big headline point and the kind of broadening out of the tariff wars that we've seen today is Trump target how other countries tax or levy taxes.
And that is particularly focused on value added taxes or VAT. And that's big in the eu. There's more than 160 countries in the world that use A VAT. The US of course does not. This kind of rekindles a battle that the US has had on and off with Europe since the 1960s over how to treat taxes and trade. But we're going to end up with, I think we can expect some big numbers aimed at some big trading partners. We just don't yet know what those numbers are going to be. But the economic war, if you will, is broadening out. This isn't just about tariffs anymore, it's about taxes, it's about regulation and other stuff.

One more headline coming out of the president in the White House, president Trump saying on exemptions or waivers being asked about that. And he says, I don't expect that. So that is certainly something we think about when tariffs are being imposed.

Hey Mike McKee, come on in here because you've been following this closely as well. You mentioned to me just before we went on air what Sean was talking about, this idea of the value added tax and that being a target of the president. Explain the significance of that.

Well, the countries, particularly in Europe, as Sean said, impose a value added tax, which taxes the value added each step of manufacturing and also the value added by retailers. And so if you've spent any time in Europe, you bought anything, you pay that tax on top of that. And if you're from out of the country, you can get it refunded when you go to Heathrow. But the

Been there, done that.

But because this is added on top of the cost of the US goods, Trump says he considers it a tax. Different countries have different tax rates, but they're all fairly significant.

Meaning we could reciprocate what the VAT is in other countries in tariffs of our own on those countries that impose the vats.

But it's hard to know exactly what reciprocate means in this case because we're not doing one for one because it's not just tariff levels. It's also going to be the vat. It's going to be subsidies that maybe governments give to companies there, regulations, ESG kind of stuff and exchange rates. The White House says. So that's why Howard Lutnick has to go back and try to figure out what the appropriate number for each country is. And it shows that this is a big one because there's a lot that's going into this now and it's in theory could add a lot to the cost of trade. And as you mentioned Carol, with the headline, this doesn't include cars, this doesn't include pharma. There's a lot of things yet to be tariff.

