Congratulations, Mr.

Well, he's back and guess what he's talking about? We will tariff and tax foreign countries to enrich our citizens. This is a surprise to no one

Because

It's one of his favorite subjects. I do like tariffs, tariff, tariffs, tariffs, tremendous tariffs, tariff, tariffs, tariffs that are massive. To me, the most beautiful word in the dictionary is tariff.

Trump has ordered federal agencies to investigate the impact of tariff policies, or in his words, recommend appropriate measures like global tariffs to fix these deficits. The topic was low on boardroom agendas under former President Biden, but since Trump's election in November, talk of tariffs has spiked,

The new president has promised to put tariffs on goods coming to the US from all around the world, not just from trading rivals such as China.

He's seeing tariffs as a leverage point to get other people to do what he wants.

In his first week back, Trump threatened to enact 10% tariffs on China, 25% tariffs on Mexico and Canada, and to use them as a tool to try to stop the Russia, Ukraine war

Trade policy under President Trump has the potential to send shock waves through the global economy

Even if Trump's threats don't materialize. The mere thought of a trade war is already appending international relations and forcing companies to prepare for the worst.

I feel like a pawn in a big game of chess.

Let's start with what we know. Tariffs are government imposed taxes on imported goods and services, which increase the cost of imports, and that's the whole point to make them less competitive compared to domestic products In a bid to help or protect local industries, their use in the United States declined dramatically after World War ii.

More and more, the cargo ships of the great trading nations are making New Orleans a regular port of coal.

And in the globalized nineties, they became a dirty word.

No country can escape the global economy and the greatest, largest, most powerful country in the

World cannot escape the global economy. Broadly speaking, everyone agreed that the freer flowing of goods and services lended to prosperity for all. But that kind of economic thinking has been turned on its head when it became clear that there are not just winners, but they're also losers from globalization. President Trump wants tariffs to raise revenue for the government. He wants tariffs to bring manufacturing back to the us and of course, he wants tariffs to level the books with key trading rivals around the world,

While Trump frames his tariffs as a way of raising trillions of dollars to pay for tax cuts. It's worth taking a look at the numbers. The blue line is what the government has estimated to collect from existing tariffs over the next four years, only a drop in the bucket compared to the black line, which shows revenue from income tax. Of course, we shouldn't forget that we have been here before.

President Trump's first term when he implemented tariffs. It sent shockwaves around the world because was breaking with convention front page of every newspaper in the country. Right now, a dive on the Dow. Because of this trade war

In Trump's first trade war, the scope of the tariffs was targeted toward capital goods and intermediate goods from China, and it was not a very large increase in tariff rates. So overall, it took average tariff rates from 1.5% to about 4.5% on overall US imports. During that second half of 2019, the trade policy uncertainty was clearly having an impact on dampening business investment. So it deescalated in late 2019 when the US and China signed the phase one agreement. In

The phase one deal. China promised to buy at least $200 billion more in US goods and services, but that didn't happen. Now Trump wants to change that and cut a new deal with the Chinese government.

Until I came along, China never paid 10 cents to this country. They ripped us off and they never paid anything

Even before Trump's inauguration day memo calling for a fresh look at US, China trade relations companies in China have been bracing themselves for a second trade war by chasing new markets and offshoring production to neighboring countries. The memo also singled out Canada and Mexico using tariffs as leverage to achieve domestic policy goals.

We're thinking in terms of 25% on Mexico and Canada because they're allowing vast numbers of people to come in and fentanyl.

Whatever the motivation, it's American companies that could suffer the most.

US auto industry has a very long supply chain that is very complicated, that takes many parts for many countries. A lot of this supply chain and auto parts came from Canada and Mexico. So imposing tariffs on Canada and Mexico basically effectively would be imposing tariffs on GM and forts production.

If he goes ahead with the kind of threats that he's talking about, then you would see question marks over how will that impact inflation? How will that impact where business puts their investment? How will it impact the flow of goods around the world?

Many US businesses are trying to war game what's coming next.

During the first Trump presidency when tariffs were enacted, it was the biggest strain our company has ever seen. A hundred percent of our products are manufactured in China. It took us 24 to 36 months to adjust the supply chain. I would estimate the spend to be around $30 million. If new tariffs are enacted, the costs are going up, and if our cost of goods sold goes up, unfortunately the cost for everybody goes up. This is not a tax on other countries. This is a tax on you,

And that's really only the first layer of the onion as you can't have a trade war without retaliation. Something that on the surface, the US might have an upper hand in

China has more to lose than the US because US imports about 450 billion of goods from China, but China only imports 150 billion of goods from us. So even if China wants to retaliate against the US tariffs, there's only 150 billion of US goods to retaliate.

But China's intrinsic role in global supply chains could offer fresh methods of retaliation.

China dominates the production of some important metals such as germanium, gallium, and these are metals that are very critical to build semiconductors. So if China were to impose export controls on these crucial minerals that will have knock on effects in US ability to build up the AI industry or build up semiconductor plans,

I'll bet it all. And as with any fight, things can get personal.

So in the first Trump administration eu, in retaliation to the US steel and aluminum tariff imposed 25% tariffs on US bourbon from Kentucky with the explicit goal of making Mitch McConnell, the Kentucky Senator unpopular. And similarly, China decides on what to retaliate in order to hit at the red states, the agriculture centers in the us. And so the industry that could suffer from a retaliation from a trade partners could range from agriculture, winemakers and automakers.

But like all policy, the devil is in the details. Something the international business community anxiously awaits the how and the when and for how long. All remain unknown and that uncertainty takes its toll on the economy.

The challenge becomes are you protecting against the risk of tariff? Are you protecting against the risk that expected tariffs are not going to be put on?

It's been found that when uncertainty on trade policy increased, what you have in a couple quarters down the line tends to be economic slowdown.

When Trump was last in office, news coverage of trade policy uncertainty was high. It dropped under Biden and stayed low. But now that trump's back, so is the uncertainty.

I can't tell you if our cost is going to go up by 0%, 10%, or 25%. I have no idea what's coming. And when you're having vague conversations with your big customers, they don't like it.

Ultimately, how this trade war impacts both the US and global economy will depend on the specifics. We'll have a long way to go before we can truly count the costs and the benefit of it.

