I think one of the big questions around all of this is how Americans will absorb this tariff, all the tariffs and any price hikes. So how are Americans feeling about this?

Yeah, I don't know if you could see me shaking my head here politically. I don't get it. I simply put, I don't get it because if we take a look here, Trump tariffs on Canada, China, and Mexico, the support is 38%. Now you don't have to be a mathematical genius to figure out that the 51% opposed is higher than the 38% support. Americans are saying, no, no, no. When it comes to these Trump tariffs, there've been some things that Trump has perhaps done in his early days that are popular. I've pointed those out, but this my dear friend, is not popular at all. I've looked at a bunch of polling data, some with vague polling language, some with more specifics like this one, and in every single one, the plurality or majority oppose the Trump tariffs and just this tiny bit right here, 38% south to 40% support 'em, Jessica.

So why do people appear to be against tariffs? I think I know the answer, but why?

But why? Sometimes I like the little layups and then I like to jump through them, right?

Alright, yeah. We all like to look smart like that. It's fine.

Exactly right. I love to look smart. It makes me look good in front of my mother. Look, tariff's effect on the US economy, just 34% say they're good. Get this. 47% say bad. How about on yourself, right? Your own economic. Look at this. Just 17% say good, 46% say bad. So you see very similar numbers on the bad effects that folks believe that the tariffs have on either the US economy or their own pocketbook. So folks think the tariffs are bad because simply put, they don't believe they work economically. And I think if you asked a lot of economists, they would agree with the American people on this

One. And what do Americans think about Trump making this one of his top priorities in his first 100 days?

Yeah. Okay. So I believe the Trump term number two began just 13 days ago. Alright, so Trump should focus on tariffs in his first a hundred days. Now Reuters Ipsos asked this question twice. When they asked it back in November of 2024, it was 1%. Look at that. It doubled all the way to 2% in December of 2024 when just 1% or 2% of Americans believe that you should be focusing, prioritizing an issue. Simply put, they want him focusing on the economy at large. They want him focusing on immigration. They don't want him focusing on tariffs. Look, Donald Trump did lay out his position on tariffs going in his election, but folks elected Donald Trump for different reasons, not for tariffs. They simply put, don't want him prioritizing it and simply put, do not like his issue positions on it.

And in his mind, the way he explains it, it helps with his top priority of immigration. He also believes that ultimately it makes America more prosperous. Of course, the question, the devil's in the details, we're going to have to see if that is actually what happens. But will Americans ultimately care? I mean, Trump has famously done a lot of things that are pretty unpopular and Americans elected him back to office.

Yeah, I think this is the big question and the honest to God truth is, I don't know, but take a look at weekly Google searches for terrorists get this. They're up 2400% versus a year ago. They've reached a 21 year high. There have been more searches for tariffs this week than for Taylor Swift. So when you're getting more people searching for tariffs than you are for anything related to Taylor Swift, you know the American people are paying attention and the fact that they don't like it and they're paying a lot of attention and they're searching for it, to me suggests that this is a political loser. The question will be whether or not folks penalize Trump for it, but they ain't going to reward him for it. Much better chance they penalize than reward him.

It will be interesting to see Harry Ton with the numbers for us as always. Thank you, Harry.

Thank you.

I don't expect anything very dramatic if we put tariffs on, they owe us a lot of money and I'm sure they're going to pay. We may have short term some little pain and people understand that. But long term, the United States has been ripped off by virtually every country in the world.

By the way, that's not how tariffs work. They don't pay them. They're paid here in the United States. Let's get right to see an in senior White House reporter, Kevin Liptak for the latest on this, and the clock is ticking to the deadline, Kevin.

Yeah, and it's quite a striking acknowledgement from the president there that Americans could feel some discomfort from these tariffs. Essentially, he's saying that in order to fulfill his campaign promises on tamping down on illicit drugs and migrants coming across the border, another one of his campaign promises probably his top campaign promise, which was to lower prices for Americans, we'll just have to wait. And that's exactly what economists say might happen. And it's not only for big purchases like cars, this could affect small purchases as well. Things directly from Chinese manufacturers, from companies like Sheen and Tud. These could really have an effect on American's pocketbooks. And the President says that the tariff regime might not end here. Listen to what he said last night when he was asked whether additional tariffs could be coming for the United Kingdom and the European Union.

Well, we're going to see what happens. It'll happen, but we're going to Mike, we'll see how things work out. It might happen with that, but it will definitely happen with the European Union. I can tell you that because they've really taken advantage of us and UK is out of line, but I'm sure I think that one can be worked out. But the European Union is, it's an atrocity.

Now by and large, Trump has enjoyed the support from Republicans on those who are opposed to have mostly remained silent. One of the objections to that is Senator Rand Paul from Kentucky. He wrote on social media that tariffs are simply taxes. He said that this could mean less trade and higher prices. Now he represents a state that could be directly affected by the reciprocal tariffs from Canada. They have gone after American liquor. Now Mexico says that they will announce their own reprisals today. China says that they will file a complaint with the World Trade Organization. One of the big questions in all of this is what Canada and Mexico can actually do to have Trump ease up on these tariffs. It has never been explicitly clear what precise metrics he's using to curb the flow of migrants and fentanyl across the border over the weekend. Justin Trudeau says that he had been trying to reach Trump on the telephone since the inauguration, but his calls hadn't been picked up. Of course that will end today. But as you heard Trump say there any hopes for a last minute reprieve seem farfetched at this point.

And again, it is already having an impact with stock futures down oil prices up the opposite of what most economists and I think most Americans hope for on a day-to-day basis. Kevin Liptak, thank you very much for that.

And Prime Minister Justin Trudeau right behind you, because Canada is responding and responding quickly with tariffs of their own, the government announcing a full list of goods imported from the United States that would be taxed and the list is long. Everything from meats and cheese to appliances like fridges and stoves, the list will continue to go. Furniture, beauty, products, fruits, vegetables, spices, sugar, chocolate, the aforementioned alcohol that we were just hearing from Kevin Liptak, CNN's Paula Newton is tracking all of this for us and what Canada is saying about this all this morning. Good morning, Paula.

Good morning to you, Kate. I think Canadians have almost surprised themselves at the reaction here, Kate. It has been so visceral. So emotional words like betrayal being thrown around is if the United States had asked for a divorce and the reason they're not being alarmist either, Kate, the reason is what Kevin just said. They do not understand what the United States wants Now. They could have irritants in the trading relationship for sure. Get to the table, the Prime Minister's office is saying, and we will negotiate. But this seems different. And remember this was proceeded by joking or not all those musings by the president that Canada should become the 51st state. I want you to listen now to just some of the reaction.

I don't think there's a lot of Americans who wake up in the morning saying, ah, damn Canada

Conversations with Howard Lutnick and others in the administration tell me that perhaps in March there's a window again. But most of this is so unpredictable.

I mean, the president has decided now to make gas in the United States more expensive. He's decided to make groceries in the United States more expensive, and our retaliation is going to cost Americans jobs that it's completely ridiculous.

I think that's what's been so unnerving, is the fact that this will in fact hurt American consumers as well. And I'll look Kate, no one's saying that Canada would win a trade war with the United States. All Canada is saying is we don't want a war at all.

