We begin the day with Trump's tariff threats and the political consequences. Recently when US President Donald Trump imposed and then suspended tariffs on all Canadian products, it got many their thinking with friends like that, who needs enemies? Well, Canada's leaders are apparently rethinking their ties to the United States. They're turning to another partner, also targeted by Trump's tariffs, an ally on the other side of the Atlantic, the European Union, Canada's largest daily newspaper. The Toronto Star has posed a question that not too long ago would've seemed fanciful. It ran with the headline. Donald Trump drives a wedge between Canada and the US with a trade war. Could we join the eu? And it's not only the Toronto star, the Economist has been pondering why Canada should join the eu. Europe needs space and resources, Canada needs people. Let's deal well leading voices in the European Union have also been getting behind it. European parliament member Gee, H, posting on X. We in Europe, remember that Canadians died to liberate our continent. In the face of Trump's madness, the EU stands with Canada. Now there is no reason why EU membership should be off the table. Well, now I'd like to play a clip for you where the Canadian Prime Minister, Justin Trudeau, speaks about standing up for Ukraine and the rules based global order. But I'd like for you to pay particular attention to when he finishes making a statement and what he's asked by a reporter. Take a look.

Standing up for Ukraine is also standing up for the international rules-based order that protects us all and has led to extraordinary prosperity these past eight decades. This is a moment for all of us to continue to stand together and as friends and partners, that's exactly what we will always do. Thank you. Thank you. We discuss, we're going to discuss all sorts, including would Canada be better at the 28 EU

Member state? All right. The voice that you heard there at the very end, that was our correspondent Jack Perrick. He joins me from Brussels and Canadian political commentator, Sean Mallon is also with us from Toronto. Gentlemen, welcome to you both. Jack, let me start with you. Since you asked him about joining the eu, is it possible for Canada to become the 28th member of the European Union and is that what Europe wants?

So it's not impossible has been the response that I've had from EU officials. After asking that question, it might have seemed a little bit sort of glib that I asked him whether it would be better for Canada to be the 28th EU member or the 51st state of the United States. But it really belies a pretty important discussion, which is where does Canada see itself its place in the world related to the United States and related to the European Union. It was very clear from Trudeau's arrival here in Brussels that they feel very warmly towards the eu. Now, the officials that I've spoken to since say that basically it wouldn't be completely impossible for Canada to decide to submit an application to be an EU member state, that while EU member states have to be, it says in the text a European country that there is actually no definition of what a European country is in that context. So therefore it wouldn't be completely

Impossible. And Shauna, I know we're taking a tongue in cheek look at Canada joining the eu, but Canadians, they must be reflecting on their place in the world given what has happened over the past couple of weeks.

Oh, yes. And reflecting very much upon the nature of our relationship with our largest trading partner. I mean, it's important to understand that Canada exports something north of 75% of our goods and services to our neighbor to the south. But the recent events with Mr. Trump musing about 51st states threatening tariffs, already imposing tariffs on steel and aluminum. It's caused a lot of self-reflection in Canada about how much this nation relies on exports to the United States for a variety of different ways. And it caused a lot of self-reflection within the country about trading within Canada, because oddly enough, there are substantial trade barriers between and among provinces as well. So it's been an issue that's gone on for decades and suddenly as without much improvement and suddenly a lot of discussion about how to improve those as well, joining the eu? Well, I can't say that it's anywhere top of the agenda right now, but we live in odd times, don't

We? Yeah, we do live in odd times. Yeah, you can put it that way. Yeah. You know that the president, US President Donald Trump, he has proposed Canada become the 51st US state. Is there any appetite, Sean? Is there any appetite in Canada for that happening?

No significance, appetite. The polls have it. So I think it's in the teens at best of anyone who would even consider it. You should know that. Not to bore you with Canadian history, but this nation was formed in 1867, largely to avoid becoming annexed by the United States. So it's an integral part of Canadian identity to be not American, much as we rely on and are so closely tied to the United States of America. So no real appetite for it. And in fact, this recent musings by President Trump has caused an upsurge in Canadian nationalism, which is not part of the Canadian nature that much. People waving the flag more a whole raft of by Canadian initiatives and grocery stores and all different kinds of forms of our economy.

Well, Sean Canada has no death penalty. It has gun controls and it has universal healthcare like the US or like Europe, but like the us it is big sky country with big trucks as well. Are Canadians, do they see themselves as a bridge sometimes between the United States and the eu?

That's one way of looking at it. One of the irritants in Canada, US trade relationships is that other nations and the concerns obviously principally China have tried to access the American market by bringing goods and services into Canada and then taking advantage of existing trade relationships, which Mr. Trump seems to be prepared to tear up to access the American market. There's a saying though, that the Americans are benevolently ignorant of Canada, whereas Canadians are malevolently knowledgeable about the United States. So it's a complicated relationship. A former prime minister pie Trudeau father of the current Prime Minister once said that Canada living next to the United States is like a sleeping next to an elephant in which you feel every twitch and shudder on the elephant's part, no matter how well-meaning it might be. And there's certainly a lot of question right now about how well-meaning the elephant is towards its smaller neighbor.

Yeah, you certainly have that. The elephant doesn't wake up and roll on top of you as well. Jack, let me ask you that. We know there, there's a number of countries, there's a long list of countries that want to join the European Union. Would Canada be in a better position to join than say Turkey, which has been trying to join for decades?

The honest truth, Brent, is yes, probably it will be more aligned with the eus values, which is the complications for many countries when they try and join the eu. You mentioned Turkey, decades long process, which is completely frozen now to become an EU member country. We saw Morocco once applied, they were deemed to be too African down on the African continent, not a European country. But also the politics are nowhere near aligned to the European unions in order to join the European Union. What a country has to do is to apply for a membership status, get candidate status, and then it has to open 35 chapters. They're called things like, is Your Justice System in line with the eus Justice System? Are your regulations on the phyto, sanitary and food regulations in line with the European Union? Will you fit into the single market? There's 35 of them, you have to open them and then close them. And some of those chapters are opened and closed very quickly with countries that want to join the European Union because they're already basically aligned. And Canada, because it is pretty democratically aligned with how most European countries work would actually probably get swift access.

Well, practically speaking though, in the here and now, how could Canada have closer ties with the EU without becoming a full fledged EU member?

Yeah, there's an EU Canada free trade deal known as C, which is already removed 98% odd of the tariffs between trades. So trade is relatively free and open between the European Union and Canada already. The political alignment and basically free movement of people so that people could move and live and work on either side visa free. That would be something that could be closer aligned that would come with EU membership if that were to ever happen. And also goods and services could be quicker. But at the moment, the trade between Canada and the European Union is considered relatively good. It's in a good place. Both sides are relatively happy.

Sean, let me bring you back. The US president reportedly is very serious about Canada becoming the 51st US state. With that in mind, how does the Canadian government plan to proceed with its relations with the United States?

Well, we're in or odd situation right now, Brent, because Mr. Trudeau is a lame duck prime minister. He's announced his resignation to take effect as soon as his liberal party picks a successor, which is March the ninth. And that's likely to be followed very quickly by a general election in which the opposition conservative party is heavily favored at this moment. So it's a very unsettled situation. It's hard to predict where Canada's going to land on this. So generally speaking, it's on an issue by issue basis in dealing with Mr. Trump right now. And as you know, the world can change in a moment depending on what he's posting on social media or what he's asked in oppress availability. So it's hard to get a good sense of where Canada, US relations are going in the longer term with Mr. Trump, partly because of the unpredictability of our political situation and the inherent unpredictability of Donald Trump

And Sean, the clock, it is ticking on this deadline for these across the board tariffs, 25% tariff on Canadian goods. Will Ottawa and Washington come to an agreement to avert that?

That's the question of the day. And that's consuming a lot of the political discussion here right now, again, with Donald Trump, hard to predict. Mr. Trudeau gave him at least the semblance of a win a week or so ago by renouncing more than a billion dollars Canadian worth of measures to tighten up the border. Should be said, he had actually had announced them some weeks before, but of course working in Trump land, you want to make sure he has the feeling that he's negotiated a good deal. So they gave that to him. Mr. Trump then moved on again to turning Gaza into the Riviera and now into the aluminum and steel tariffs he's announced this week. So it's utterly changeable. The threats of retaliatory tariffs are still there.

And

They were substantial and targeted at supposedly Republican areas of the United States like Kentucky Bourbon or Florida orange juice to try to influence Trump by local Republicans. Not much sign of any of that happening yet. But yeah, so that's a long way of saying who knows, but there's still very much the threat of a trade war.

And let me ask you both before we wrap up here, and I'm going to start with you, Jack. Will Canada apply to join the European Union sooner rather than later?

No, but the fact that we are talking about this and the Trump White House means that we will, I think, see much closer Canada EU alignment.

Okay. And Sean, you get the last word. Are you betting on a European future?

No. It'd be nice to have an EU passport, I have to say, but no unlikely. Certainly Canada's pushing hard to expand. Its trading partners, EU principally among them as well. And yeah, it was noted today in the meeting among Mr. Trudeau and the European leaders that since Cita was signed in 2017, trade has increased by more than 60%. Now it's still a distant fraction of American trade, and still France and Belgium have not fully ratified the deal. Various agricultural issues, but certainly more trades EU membership. Well, let's just see.

Yeah, let's just see. We'll see if there's more business south of the border or across the Atlantic. Gentlemen, Jack Perrick, my colleague in Brussels and Canadian political commentators, Sean, Marilyn. To both of you gentlemen, we appreciate your time. Thank you.

