Okay. And then Japan. Are you okay with having a foreign country having a controlling interest in a US Steel company?

Well, let's look at this. When I came here, they were going to buy it and Biden was going to approve it. All of a sudden, Biden didn't because he heard I wasn't going to. I don't want US Steel being owned by a foreign country, but control the interest is okay. They have don't have a controlling, they have an investment. All they're going to have is an investment. Will it be a joint? I don't mind that investment in a company, but especially US Steel. US Steel for 15 years was the greatest company in the world, the greatest number one company in the world, and I'm not going to let another country buy. We had a great meeting of that, but they are allowed to invest in it and that's different.

Mr. President on Tariffs, sir, you've talked about reciprocal tariffs coming in this week. Can you tell us a little bit more about that and are you announcing a plan

For it? This? Yeah, I'll be announcing, I'll be announcing probably Tuesday or Wednesday at a news conference, reciprocal tariffs, and very simply it's if they charge us, we charge them. That's all. When does it go into impact, sir? Almost immediately, but I'll be announcing the details of it highly detailed and it'll be great for everybody, including the other countries, but if they are charging us 130% and we're charging them nothing, it's not going to stay that way. This is on every country. Every country will be reciprocal president. Can you confirm that? It won't affect everybody because there's somewhere we have similar tariffs, but the ones that are taking advantage of the United States, we're going to have a, it's reciprocity, it's reciprocal. We're going to have a reciprocal, but we'll have a news conference Tuesday or Wednesday.

Just on the steel question, just so I understand,

We'll also be announcing steel tariffs on Monday. Tomorrow. Monday, yeah, tomorrow. What countries will those go on? Everybody. Steel, including Canada, Mexico? Yeah. Any steel coming into the United States is going to have a 25% tariff. What about aluminum, sir? Aluminum tear, 10%. No, 25%. 25 for aluminum,

25 above both. And on steel, are you ruling out then If on steel having a 51% stake or higher, they won't have a majority stake?

Nobody can have a majority stake for US Steel. They can for other companies, but not for US. Steel. I think you agree with that. US Steel was one of our great companies and through a lot of stupidity and bad government and also bad management of the company, it lost that luster, but it's going to gain it back and tariffs are going to help. Tariffs are going to make it very successful again, and I think it is good management now too. Yeah.

