On our side, we will be implementing 25% tariffs on US products. Canadians are perplexed, I think, disappointed. We view ourselves as your neighbor, your closest friend, your ally.

Canada and Mexico are upping the ante as they counter president Trump's new tariffs with tariffs of their own. China is threatening the US with retaliatory measures as well. For more on this, let's bring in Fox business contributor Jonathan Honig. Jonathan, thanks for joining us. And you see Canada and Mexico saying dollar for dollar. We're going to counter you. Where do you come down in the debate over whether or not the president's tariffs now enacted are going to be successful or whether they're going to make things worse? The Wall Street Journal just eviscerating this decision saying it makes no sense.

Yeah, I mean, well, they aren't just threats anymore, Griff, right? This isn't just in a negotiating tool. These are now in place and the president has some really ambitious goals. He's talked about curtailing illegal immigration, curtailing drugs. The fact is that tariffs are taxes. You can't evade that there are taxes paid by American importers. One of the effects that we know is that it will raise costs for American consumers. Yale had a number out over the weekend, estimating at about a loss of about $1,200 in household income per year because of the tariffs. And even Trump himself, Griffith admitting that Americans will feel some pain. And there's historical examples of this in the first term. For example, the tariffs on washing machines raised the price of washing machines about $90 a unit. So there's a lot of impacts that were not even going to be seen. Tax foundation is estimating about 344,000 jobs lost as a result of these tariffs. Four tenths of 1% of GDP. The fact is, Griff, that we import a lot of goods, three fourths of all fruit is imported and about one in five pairs of shoes. So lots imported and lots going to be

Effect. Jonathan, you say that the president says there will be pain. Here's what he says in a truth social post here today, taking on the Wall Street Journal, namely saying, make your product in the USA and there are no tariffs. Why should the US lose trillions of dollars in subsidizing other countries? And why should these other countries pay a small fraction of the cost of what USA citizens pay for drugs and pharmaceuticals as an example. This will be the golden age of America. Will there be some pain? Yes, maybe and maybe not so, maybe not. Here's my question for you, Jonathan. And I think the argument that President Trump is trying to say to critics like yourself, don't miss the forest for the trees because his entire plan, which includes increasing energy production, deregulation for business tax cuts, and the tariffs to balance the playing field, is going to be counter inflationary and ultimately lead in what he calls this golden age. That's his pushback. What say you?

Well, I tell you, a brand new world. What we know, Griff, is that many Americans, many American companies, are not just warning about the tariffs. I mean, whether it be the retailers, I said, the shoemakers, steel workers, United auto workers, all warning against the tariffs warning there'll be higher prices. What we're seeing is that bull market in lobbying, I mean, every lobbyist is now working in full bloom looking for exemption. So one thing we know is that the tariffs will breed more corruption, more payoffs, more payola, more chicanery. So as I said, president Trump has amazing, ambitious goals. We'd like to see them achieved, but it's unclear, at least to many economists, whether tariffs, taxes on Americans will achieve those goals.

Let's talk about the auto. We hear a lot about the pain Americans in the short term Mayfield in regards to the auto industry with both Canada and Mexico. What does that look like for us in the near future and potentially over a course of months if this continues?

Well, so often auto parts, elements of the McGriff are manufactured in Canada, manufactured in the us, manufactured in Mexico, then shipped from place to place. So the supply chain that powers the American economy is so multifaceted. It's so fascinating. It's so intricate that something like this about attacks on trade writ large has such wide ranging effects. And the famous economist, Baat always talked about that, which is seen and that which is unseen. So this will, as I said, have such far reaching impacts, and that's why CEOs big and smaller, scrambling to look at their supply chains. You might see people, let's say, move out of importing from China, but we could see, for example, imports from Vietnam, pickup as well, Grif. So there's going to be a lot of supply chain rejiggering, and it's really difficult to tell what the net result will be from these new tariffs, these new taxes. As I said, it's a brave new world. We haven't seen tariffs like this in decades in America.

Well, and what's fascinating to me, and this is really my last question for you, Jonathan, and great insight as always, but it was Trump that got rid of nafta, created the U-S-M-C-A. If his intention now is to bring his Canadian and Mexican partners back to the table to do a different UMCA, would that not be something that he's already gained by bringing him willingly or unwillingly to that table?

Sure. I mean, shoot, would it be great? Would it be ideal? I think from the market's perspective, Griff would be to lower taxes, lower tariffs across the board. Not only Canadian tariffs, Mexican tariffs, but also American tariffs as well. Interestingly, this recent order from the president violates the order that he cited in his previous term. He said it goes against it. So oil always say that the market hates uncertainty. And we saw a massive fall off on Friday when these tariffs were announced. There's a lot of uncertainty among American manufacturers, many companies, entire business model, surrounded by importing low cost. So there's a lot of scurrying, a lot of uncertainty as a result of these tariffs. And as they continue to get rolled out, and of course, as the retaliation continues to roll in, the economy's going to be roiled.

Well, you're right about one thing for sure. Jonathan. Markets don't like instability and uncertainty, and we shall see what the markets do tomorrow morning. Jonathan Hoig, great insight as always. Thank you. Thank you.

