Last night, president Trump reiterated his plan to impose reciprocal tariffs, and that would be on April the second.

This system is not fair to the United States and never was. And so on April 2nd, I wanted to make it April 1st, but I didn't want to be accused of April Fool's Day, April 2nd, reciprocal tariffs kick in and whatever they tariff us other countries, we will tariff them. That's reciprocal back and forth. Whatever they tax us, we will tax them. Take in trillions and trillions of dollars that create jobs like we have never seen before.

Okay, we've already got some tariffs already imposed. More coming April. The second is that inflationary,

The tariffs we have right now are going to boost price inflation. They've already pushed the price of steel higher by 30% since the end of January. Price of lumber futures are up by 20%, so that would mean higher prices for those many products that you steal or that use lumber, especially in the construction industry. And if you look at it closely, the two industry groups that are getting clobbered in terms of stock price performance have been the home builders as well as the auto industry. They're getting banged up pretty badly

Because the stuff that goes into building a house or building into

A car

You're in trouble.

And plus automobiles. A manufacturer of automobiles is very much cross water between the United States and Canada, the US and Mexico. It's an absolute mess. And if I was a consumer, would I buy a car anytime soon? No, because I would make the assumption that this jump in tariffs, this problem in trade will be temporary, and once it's over, the price of automobiles will move lower. So it's not only inflation I'm worried about, it's also going to be the loss of consumers spending real economic activity. Those many workers whose jobs depend upon getting imported materials.

That was my next question. I'm going to pick an arbitrary timeframe. One month, for example, if we got this trade fight and the tariffs and they continue for one full month, what's the impact on the economy?

It's very bad. I think even if we set aside what's going on with the trade deficit, you're going to get a big increase in the trade deficit in the first quarter because all of these companies tried to push forward the imports before the tariffs took effect. So you'll probably look at a drop by real GDP. It's what happens in the rest of the economy there. I would expect little, if any growth, I would expect the worst performance by the US economy, excluding trade since the Covid recession.

Ouch. How about that? Alright, John, tell it how it is. Thanks very much indeed. Well, thank.

