Joining me now. Peter Navarro, white House counselor for trade and manufacturing. Peter, great to have you on tonight. The faces,

It's, see you, Laura.

The faces in the crowd today were hilarious As Vice President Vance spoke about a relationship with Europe. Now Europe is threatening reciprocal tariffs. I know you've heard the comments from Germany and France, your reaction tonight to what they heard from you all yesterday regarding tariffs.

Hey, here's an idea. The EU runs like hundreds of billions of dollars of a trade surplus every year. When do they use that money to pay for nato? Hey, there's an idea. Stop the corporate welfare. The fact is, Laura, they cheat us. You know how many cars they sell us versus how many we sell them. They got a VAT tax, a value added tax that works just like a tariff, that they've been sticking this to us for years and it's such an imbalanced trade relationship. And what Donald Trump's going to do is he's going to level the playing field, make it fair again, both for national defense and economic security reasons. The steel and aluminum tariffs we did this week are a great start to that. And by the way, the EU is a tremendous part of the capacity over capacity we have in steel and aluminum and they're dumping it. They're governments are responsible and like a billion euros here, three billionaire subsidizing these steel and aluminum industries to attack the United States. So these bureaucrats in the crowd, Laura, they don't know what hit him. I mean, Donald Trump is moving so fast, he float like a butterfly, sting, like a be

Peter on the issue of trade and steel versus aluminum. We know the steel manufacturing is so critical to America's future, and that's just without a doubt. But the aluminum industry is a little bit different because we only have a few smelters left in the United States. Most of the dirty work is done up in Canada. There are some new technologies I know out there that are emerging that we may or may not support down the road, but why would 25% on aluminum make sense? When last time, I think you all put what, 10% on aluminum, but now it's up to 25. Trying to figure that

Out. Well, the problem we had when we put the tariffs on in 20 18, 20 5% for steel, 10% for aluminum. They worked beautifully at the time, but what the Biden regime did was give all these country exemptions and product exclusions and capacity utilization as few foundries as we have is down to 50% when it needs to be up at 80. You make your own case lower. We lost two foundries, two big foundries during the Biden years. We can't afford to do that. Remember, in times of crisis, we have to depend on steel and aluminum for our defense needs. So President Trump is fully confident that a 25% tariff will be enough to bring back significant investment here, both domestic investment and foreign investment.

Peter, we cannot wait to see the heads continuing to explode as the tariff thing plays out. Great to have you back on the show, Peter. Thank you so much.

