Another day, another set of tariffs. This time around, it's still an aluminum, aluminum as they call it in America. And lemme just give you the big picture here, starting with aluminum. This is showing you just how much each country around the world produces. It goes all the way back to 1900. That's the US okay? So it used to be one of the world's biggest producers, other countries have since caught up and actually overtaken it. So Canada that's in front partly down to the fact that it takes a lot of power to make aluminum. You are refining it with electricity, it's kind of electrolysis and there's a lot of hydro in Canada, so that's pretty clean aluminum. But the big picture here, you need to zoom out the big picture is something else. Have a look at this. The big picture is China. Okay? So Chinese production has gone through the roof and China has been pumping out loads of aluminum around the world.
And that's part of the picture here. And when you look at just how to what extent the US is dependent on other countries around the world, the higher line is the more dependent America is on imports. That is now well above or it's been above 50%, it's nearly 50% at the moment. It's around that point, which down from really low levels previously. So American independence in producing aluminum's, no longer the case. However worth just saying, I showed you that China chart a moment ago you might've thought, is that all China? Well, no, this is showing you where aluminum comes to the US from, and China's actually only a small part of it by far and away the biggest part, the biggest importer into the us. It's Canada. To the extent that actually when people talk about the North American market, they usually include Canada in it.
But obviously if Canada's going to be hit by that, that's going to be a really big deal. Indeed. What kind of things is aluminum amused for? Well, it goes into a lot of things. It goes into transportation. So you're talking about planes. So it's light, it's a light. Strong metal, inter planes into trains, into automobiles, particularly electric vehicles, but other things as well. Containers, cans obviously for soft drinks. And the issue here is if you are pushing up the cost of aluminum that you are importing and it's very hard produce to get those smelters going overnight, then the cost of all of this stuff, all of those components into it goes up. And that's the issue. Potential big inflation in the US as a result of this. And all of those goods go up as well worth saying with steel. So I showed you that chart a moment ago looking at aluminum production, same thing here, okay, for steel, there's the UK as well as the us The picture is basically the same.
China has gone through the roof recently. Massive increase in Chinese production. And again, have a look at this chart. This is showing you that dependence and here it's a subtly different story. So whereas the US has become much more dependent on imports when it comes to aluminum with steel, much less so actually that's much lower when it comes to import dependence. So in other words, the US able to deal with higher costs of steel, imported steel slightly more than when it comes to aluminum. That's an interesting difference here, but there is a big story here and the big story is I'll show you those charts of Chinese production going through the roof. As a result of that, everyone is finding it hard to compete. And when you look at just how much it costs to make steel aluminum in China, it's relatively low, partly because energy costs are low, partly because there are big subsidies for producing things like aluminum.
The high these bars are the more state aid there is that subsidies and aluminum's there, steel is there as well, as well as all sorts of other things like semiconductors, solar panels, cement production as well. And as a result it is really hard to compete. Some people call this over capacity and a really good illustration of this actually comes back to electric cars. This is showing you how much domestic sales for electric cars are in China. Actually it's all domestic sales of all cars. And this is showing you how much domestic production is. Okay? So production within China is projected to go higher and higher and higher. And you can see that when you are get producing more cars than you're actually able to consume, then you are pumping them out around the world. And that's the concern that's happening. Not just with ATE vehicles but with everything else as well.
And that's part of the story behind these subsidies, one presumes, but there's a big impact here as well. Have a look at this. This shows you who the UK still exports still to. We don't make that much still. We really don't all that much, but we do export quite a lot to the US of that smaller amounts of steel, high production, high quality pieces of steel that is going to be impacted. Obviously if there aren't going to be restrictions to these tariffs, but we'll have to see. We just don't know. And we're taking it with all of these policies basically one day at a time.

