Trump begins a new week in his efforts to remake the federal government. He announced today plans to impose new tariffs starting tomorrow. Trump is making history tonight. He's the first sitting commander in chief to attend the Super Bowl. This is video of the president going out onto the field and taking pictures with law enforcement before the beginning of the game. Willie James Inman has that story from West Palm Beach, Florida.

Tonight, president Donald Trump is set to become the first sitting president to attend the Super Bowl. Trump says he'll announce on Monday that the United States will impose 25% tariffs on all steel and aluminum and ports, including from Canada and Mexico.

Eddie Steele coming into the United States is going to have a 25%

Tariff. Trump's stop in New Orleans begins a new week as his administration undertakes a dramatic overhaul of the federal government. With the help of billionaire Elon Musk Trump is putting multiple departments and agencies under the cost cutting microscope. The president spoke about the initiatives, several of which are being challenged in court. We're

Talking about fraud, waste, abuse, and when a president can't look for fraud and waste and abuse, we don't have a country anymore.

So far more than 65,000 federal workers have taken the Trump administration's proposed buyout. According to the US Office of Personnel Management, the administration's intense focus on U-S-A-I-D is sparking debate between Republicans and Democrats.

I certainly think the government is far too big, far too bloated, and we're on a path now to start to see its shrink. This is the first step only, but we're moving in the right direction.

We are seeing an executive branch that has decided that they are no longer going to abide by the Constitution in honoring Congress's role in the creation of the agencies in the role in deciding where money is allocated.

In addition, the Trump administration reportedly has ordered the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau to halt almost all of its work that in effect shutters the agency that was created to protect consumers after the 2008 financial crisis and subprime mortgage lending scandal. Willie James Inman, CBS News, west Palm Beach, Florida

Super Bowl.

